A join is how you read two tables as if they were one honest list.

customers has names.

orders has totals.

Neither table has the full sentence: Maya spent forty-two.

The sentence appears when customer_id matches.

FROM customers JOIN orders ON customers.customer_id equals orders.customer_id.

ON is the match rule.

It is not a filter in the WHERE sense, though it looks like one.

It says which row on the left belongs with which row on the right.

Inner join keeps a pair only when both sides match.

Maya has two orders, so Maya appears twice.

That duplication is correct.

She really did order twice.

A customer with no orders disappears from an inner join.

An order whose customer_id is missing disappears too.

Left join keeps every row from the left table.

When there is no match, the right-hand columns are NULL.

Those empty cells are the point, not a bug.

They show you customers who have not ordered yet.

Right join keeps every row from the right table.

Most people write a left join and swap the table order instead.

Full join keeps unmatched rows from both sides.

SQLite does not ship a full join keyword.

You can still build the idea with a union of two left joins.

CROSS JOIN pairs every row with every row.

Four customers and four orders become sixteen rows.

Use it only when you mean a combination, not a match.

When a result explodes in size, you probably forgot the ON clause.

That accidental cross join is a famous mess.

Natural join matches columns that share a name.

It saves typing and hides the rule.

Prefer ON with explicit columns.

You can see the contract.

Join more than two tables by repeating the pattern.

Match orders to customers, then orders to stores.

Each ON is one relationship.

WHERE after a join filters the paired rows.

Put city equals Austin in WHERE if you only want Austin pairs.

Do not put the match itself in WHERE if you meant a left join.

A condition on the right table in WHERE can turn a left join back into an inner join.

Keep match rules in ON.

Keep extra filters in WHERE, and watch NULLs.

Aliases keep the sentence short.

FROM customers AS c JOIN orders AS o ON c.customer_id equals o.customer_id.

Qualify every column when names collide.

Run the inner join, then the left join, on the same ON clause.

Compare the row counts.

The extra empty cells tell you who has no partner.

That is the join doing its job.

A join condition with OR is usually a mistake.

You meant two different relationships, or you meant a filter.

Keep ON tight.

Inequality joins exist: every order whose total is greater than a threshold row.

They are rare in this course.

They can explode like a cross join.

Prefer equality on keys.

USING is a shorthand when both columns share a name.

JOIN orders USING customer_id.

It also folds the two columns into one in the result in some engines.

ON is clearer while you learn.

Select the columns you need.

SELECT star after a join duplicates customer_id and hides which table it came from.

Qualify.

c.customer_id, o.order_id, o.total.

When you join three tables, walk with your finger.

customers to orders on customer_id.

orders to lines on order_id.

If a hop is missing, you invented a cross join in the middle.

COUNT after a join counts pairs, not customers, unless you DISTINCT or group.

Maya's two orders become two in the count.

That is why summaries often group after they join.

NULL on the match column never equals NULL.

Those rows only survive a left join as unmatched.

If you stored missing customers as zero, zero will join to nothing useful unless you have a fake customer zero.

Prefer NULL and a left join, or a real guest customer row, and pick one.

Practice with the four orders and three customers until the inner and left counts are numbers you can explain.

Then the syntax is just spelling.

The idea is the match.

Name the match.

Keep it in ON.

Then choose which unmatched rows you still want to see.

A join is how you ask a question that no single table can answer.

Product names live on products.

Review text lives on reviews.

The question which reviews belong to which product needs both.

FROM products JOIN reviews ON products.product_id equals reviews.product_id is the map.

ON is the matching rule.

It is not decoration.

Without a matching rule, every product pairs with every review.

That Cartesian product is huge, and almost every pair is a lie.

The engine is not being clever.

It is being literal: you asked for every combination.

INNER JOIN keeps only pairs that match.

A product with no reviews disappears from an inner join.

A review whose product_id is missing from products also disappears.

LEFT JOIN keeps every row from the left table.

When there is no match, the right-hand columns are NULL.

That is how you find products that have never been reviewed: LEFT JOIN, then WHERE review_id IS NULL.

RIGHT JOIN keeps every row from the right table.

FULL OUTER JOIN, where the engine has it, keeps rows from both sides, with NULLs where a match is missing.

Most day-to-day work is inner or left.

Say which rows you refuse to lose before you pick the join type.

WHERE after a join filters the combined rows.

Putting a right-table filter in WHERE on a left join can accidentally turn it into an inner join.

If you meant to keep unmatched left rows, put that filter in ON, or test IS NULL on purpose.

JOIN is about how rows meet.

WHERE is about which combined rows you still want.

Aliases shorten table names so products.product_id can be p.product_id.

Once you alias, use the alias everywhere in that query.

Qualify every column that exists on more than one table.

product_id without a table name is ambiguous once both tables have it.

You can join more than two tables, one pair at a time.

Each ON should name a real key relationship, not a guess that two names look similar.

Joining on city because both tables have a city column is usually a mistake.

Cities are not identifiers.

Keys are.

Read a join query as: start from this table, bring matching rows from that table, then keep the ones that still matter.

If the row count explodes, you probably matched too loosely or forgot ON.

If the row count collapses to nothing, you probably inner-joined past a missing parent.

Check counts at each join when the result looks wrong.

The join is not magic.

It is a matching rule you can say in one sentence.

If you cannot say the sentence, do not write the JOIN yet.

WHERE versus JOIN, as the lecture insists.

Old style FROM products, reviews WHERE products.product_id equals reviews.product_id is an inner join in costume.

Miss the WHERE and you have a Cartesian product again.

JOIN ON makes the matching rule visible.

Prefer the visible form.

A WHERE that further filters price greater than twenty after the join is a row filter on the combined result.

It is not a second join.

People confuse them because both can mention two tables.

ON is for how they meet.

WHERE is for who remains.

If you write LEFT JOIN and then WHERE right.key IS NOT NULL, you asked for inner.

Write INNER JOIN if that is what you meant.

The comparison of WHERE and JOIN is this: one combines, one selects, and stuffing combine logic into WHERE is how 2010 tutorials hid the Cartesian risk.

Do not hide it.

JOIN ON, then WHERE, then the rest.

Close with questions, the way a careful lecture does.

Answer in a sentence you could defend at a keyboard.

What question needs a join?

One that no single table can answer.

What does ON do?

It states the matching rule, usually a key.

What is a Cartesian product here?

Every row paired with every row because ON was missing.

What does INNER JOIN drop?

Unmatched rows from both sides.

What does LEFT JOIN keep?

Every row from the left table, NULL on the right when missing.

How do you find parents with no children?

LEFT JOIN, then WHERE child key IS NULL.

When does WHERE turn a left join into an inner join?

When it demands a non-NULL right column.

Join versus WHERE?

JOIN combines, WHERE filters the combination.

Why alias tables?

Shorter names, required once you alias, and to qualify shared column names.

Why qualify product_id?

Both tables have it after a join.

Is joining on city usually right?

No. Cities are not identifiers.

Why did the product name repeat?

Two reviews, so two result rows; the grain is the review.

Should you SUM price on that grain?

Not if you would count the product twice by accident.

Old comma FROM with WHERE match?

An inner join in costume, easy to forget the match.

What do you count after each join?

Row counts, to catch explosion or collapse.

RIGHT JOIN in one sentence?

Keep every row from the right table.

FULL OUTER in one sentence?

Keep rows from both sides, NULL where a match is missing.

Which two types do most work?

INNER and LEFT.

What sentence must you say before JOIN?

How these rows meet.

If you cannot say it?

Do not write the JOIN yet.

If an answer needed a second table, go draw it before you write more SQL.
