A foreign key does not only check new child rows.

It also decides what happens when the parent moves or leaves.

ON DELETE RESTRICT or NO ACTION refuses to delete a parent that still has children.

That is the safe default in spirit, even when the dialect wording differs.

Maya still has orders, so Maya stays.

ON DELETE CASCADE deletes the children too.

Delete the order, and the order lines go with it.

That matches a weak entity.

It is violent on a customer.

Do not cascade a customer delete unless you truly mean to erase history.

ON DELETE SET NULL clears the pointer and keeps the child.

The order remains, with no customer.

The column must allow NULL.

ON DELETE SET DEFAULT writes the default value instead.

Useful when a placeholder parent exists, rare otherwise.

ON UPDATE CASCADE copies a changed parent key into the children.

If you never change primary keys, you barely need it.

That is one more reason to prefer dull surrogates.

Write the action next to the foreign key, not in a wiki.

The engine will not read the wiki.

Different relationships deserve different actions.

order_lines cascade from orders.

orders restrict from customers.

credentials cascade from customers if you treat them as a part.

Think in sentences.

When an order disappears, its lines were never independent.

When a customer disappears, the orders are history, so refuse, or archive, or soft-delete instead.

Soft-delete is an application pattern: a deleted_at column.

It is not an ON DELETE action.

Do not mix them without a plan.

Test the action with two rows.

Delete the parent.

See whether the child vanished, blocked, or went null.

Then keep that behavior.

ON DELETE CASCADE on a tall tree can remove more than you see.

A customer cascade that also cascades orders that cascade lines that cascade shipments is a cliff.

Draw the cliff before you enable it.

RESTRICT two levels up even if the bottom cascades.

NO ACTION and RESTRICT are close.

The difference is when the check runs, especially with deferred constraints.

In classroom SQL they feel the same.

In a long transaction they might not.

SET NULL can surprise a NOT NULL you forgot.

The ALTER will fail, or the delete will fail later.

Pair them on purpose.

Some teams never cascade from an application user.

They delete children in a script, then delete the parent, all inside one transaction.

The foreign key still RESTRICT, which catches a missed child table.

That is a valid policy.

The engine is the last reviewer.

Triggers that delete children are a homemade cascade.

Prefer the declared action unless you need extra logging.

Logging can live in a trigger that does not replace the action.

Document the cliff.

Test it on a copy.

Then the production delete is boring.

Boring deletes are the goal.

Actions are how you choose the boredom: refuse, take the children, or drop the pointer.

Pick per arrow.

Write it in the constraint.

Sleep.

An action is a story about grief.

The parent is gone.

Do the children vanish, stay unnamed, or block the funeral?

Pick the story per arrow.

Do not inherit CASCADE from a snippet.

Snippets do not know your history table.

Restrict history.

Cascade parts.

Null only when unnamed is a real state.

Test with two rows, not with production.

Read the row counts after the delete.

Keep the story that matches those counts.

Write the story in the constraint.

Then a new engineer will not guess.

Guessing is how cliffs get steeper.

Declared actions are the railing.

A foreign key is a link: one or more columns in a child that reference a parent's key.

A review points at a product and may also point at a user.

Two foreign keys on one child is normal.

Name each constraint.

CONSTRAINT reviews_product_fk FOREIGN KEY (product_id) REFERENCES products (product_id) is a sentence the engine can run.

The default referential action is NO ACTION or RESTRICT, depending on dialect: refuse the parent change if children exist.

That default is how you do not evaporate history by deleting a product someone reviewed.

ON DELETE CASCADE deletes matching children when the parent goes.

Use it when the child cannot exist without the parent and you mean to destroy the whole bundle: order lines when an unfinished order is discarded.

Do not cascade a product into a year of invoices.

ON DELETE SET NULL clears the child's pointer and keeps the child row.

Reviews might remain as anonymous text if a user is removed and the business allows it.

The column must allow NULL.

ON DELETE SET DEFAULT points the child at a declared default parent, such as a placeholder user.

ON UPDATE CASCADE rewrites the copied key if the parent's key changes.

If your primary keys are dull and never edited, you will barely need ON UPDATE.

That is a reason dull keys are kind.

If you used a natural key people edit, ON UPDATE CASCADE is a moving truck for every child.

Prefer not to move the house numbers.

Prefer a surrogate that never changes.

Match the action to the sentence in requirements: when a parent leaves, children vanish, children stay with a hole, or the parent is not allowed to leave.

Write that sentence in the constraint.

Test it: insert parent, insert child, delete parent, SELECT the child.

If the child is gone and you wanted a hole, you cascaded by mistake.

If the delete errors and you wanted a bundle gone, you restricted by mistake.

Multiple children mean multiple policies.

Payments might restrict.

Draft lines might cascade.

Do not pick one action for the whole database out of fashion.

Pick per relationship.

SQLite still needs foreign keys enabled or none of the actions run.

Turn them on in every connection that should obey the design.

Then delete and update are part of the schema, not a scavenger hunt in application code.
