A correct schema still leaks if every login can SELECT star from customers.

Access control is who may read, write, change shape, or grant those powers to someone else.

SQLite files are usually one user on disk.

The operating system password is the lock.

MySQL and PostgreSQL have users inside the server.

GRANT SELECT ON orders TO analyst.

REVOKE UPDATE ON orders FROM analyst.

Least privilege means start with nothing, then add the verbs required.

An analyst who never updates should not hold UPDATE.

A checkout service needs INSERT on orders and SELECT on books.

It does not need DROP TABLE.

Roles group privileges.

Grant to a role, then grant the role to people.

When someone changes jobs, you revoke the role, not twenty tables by hand.

Views can narrow columns.

A view without email lets support read names without seeing mailboxes.

GRANT SELECT on the view, not on the base table.

That is hide-columns as a security tool, not only a convenience.

Do not put the database root password in an application.

The application gets a user that can do its job and nothing louder.

Migrations may use a stricter user in a pipeline, not at runtime.

Row-level policies exist in PostgreSQL.

They filter which rows a user sees.

That is a later, sharper tool.

Start with GRANT and views.

Audit who has what.

A privilege you cannot name is a privilege you should revoke.

SQL injection is not a GRANT problem.

It is a query-building problem.

Prepared statements keep user text out of the statement shape.

You still GRANT only what the app user needs, so a stolen query does less.

Defense is layered.

Schema, privileges, views, prepared statements.

Write the job as verbs on tables.

Then GRANT those verbs.

Then stop.

PUBLIC is a role you should look at.

Some engines grant surprising defaults to PUBLIC.

REVOKE them when you mean least privilege.

Table owners bypass some checks.

Do not own application tables as the app user if you can avoid it.

Own as a migrator, grant to the app.

Column-level GRANT exists in PostgreSQL.

GRANT SELECT (name, city) ON customers TO support.

Views are still easier to explain to a human.

Use column grants when a view is too heavy.

TEMPORARY tables and TEMP are session-scoped in many engines.

They do not replace privilege design.

A user who can create a temp table still should not SELECT emails.

Passwords in the server should be hashed, and rotation should be a calendar event.

That is operations, and it still belongs next to GRANT in your head.

A leaked read-only user is better than a leaked superuser.

Design for leak size.

Logs of GRANT changes are part of access control.

If you cannot say who gave UPDATE last month, you cannot audit.

Turn the logs on.

The verbs were the start.

The job description is the GRANT list.

Keep them equal.

When they drift, revoke.

Then the schema's privacy matches the schema's shape.

If everyone is a superuser, you do not have access control.

You have a shared login and a hope.

Hope is not a GRANT.

Split migrator, app, analyst, support.

Give each a verb list.

Views for support.

SELECT for analysts.

INSERT where the app sells.

No DROP at runtime.

Revoke PUBLIC extras.

Log the GRANTs.

Prepare the statements.

Layer those, and a stolen query is a smaller fire.

Smaller fires are the design.

Least privilege is the name.

The job description is the implementation.

Databases hold credentials, payments, and secrets.

Two pillars protect them: access control for who may act, and cryptography for what a thief would see.

Miss either, and a copied file or a curious intern is enough.

Access control decides who can read, write, or administer.

Discretionary access control is an administrator granting privileges by hand.

It works on a toy.

It does not scale past a handful of people who never leave.

Mandatory access control assigns clearance levels to data and to people.

A user may read a row only if their clearance meets the label on that data.

Public, sensitive, confidential is a typical ladder in a school or hospital sketch.

Student names might be public inside the institution.

Grades might be sensitive.

Identity documents confidential.

The engine, or the surrounding system, must actually enforce the labels.

A comment in a wiki is not mandatory access control.

Role-based access control groups privileges into roles: analyst, clerk, admin.

You grant the role, not a thousand table privileges, to each person.

When someone changes jobs, you revoke the role.

When a job's duties change, you edit the role once.

That is why roles scale.

In SQL, GRANT SELECT ON orders TO analyst is the shape.

REVOKE takes it back.

GRANT with GRANT OPTION lets a user pass privileges on, which is a power you should hand out rarely.

Least privilege means a reporting user cannot DELETE.

An application role that takes orders should not ALTER TABLE.

Separate the account the app uses from the account a human uses to administer.

Hashing is one-way.

You store a hash of a password, not the password.

When the user types it again, you hash the attempt and compare.

A stolen table of hashes should not give readable passwords.

Salt, a per-row random value mixed into the hash, stops a single rainbow table from cracking every user who chose the same password.

Use a slow password hash designed for passwords, not a fast general hash meant for files.

Encryption is two-way with a key.

At rest, a disk or column can be ciphertext so a stolen file is not a stolen diary.

In transit, connections use encryption so a packet sniff is not a password dump.

Keys must live somewhere that is not the same stolen disk, or you encrypted with a sticky note.

Hash passwords.

Encrypt secrets you must later read, like a stored token the app must present.

Do not encrypt passwords you only need to check.

You would have to decrypt to compare, and then you are back to storing something reversible.

Access control without hashing still leaks passwords if the table is SELECT-able.

Hashing without access control still lets anyone run SELECT on the hashes and attack them at leisure.

Together they are the two doors.

This lesson stays on those doors.

It is not a cloud console tour.

It is GRANT, roles, labels, hashes, salts, and encryption used on purpose.

Write down who may read orders, who may update them, and whether a password is ever stored in the clear.

If the answer to the last is yes, stop and hash.

If everyone shares one admin login, stop and make roles.

Then the valuable rows have a chance of staying boring to an attacker.

Hashing is not encryption, said again with the school passwords.

Counselors do not decrypt a password to help a student log in.

They reset, which writes a new hash.

Encryption would have let them read the old password, which you never want.

Access control says counselors may UPDATE password_hash and not SELECT other students' grades if that is the policy.

GRANT UPDATE on that column, or on a procedure that resets, is tighter than GRANT UPDATE on the whole table.

Procedures and column grants are how least privilege gets specific.

If the engine lacks column grants, split confidential columns.

Splitting for security is still normalization-shaped: a table whose only job is secrets.

Point at it with a key from students.

GRANT on the secrets table to counselors only.

Now a leaked SELECT star on students is not a leaked id number.

That design is the long security film, in fundamentals language.

Close with questions, the way a careful lecture does.

Answer in a sentence you could defend at a keyboard.

Two pillars?

Access control for who may act, cryptography for what a thief would see.

Discretionary access?

Hand-granted privileges. Fine for a toy. Does not scale.

Mandatory access?

Clearance labels on data and on people.

Role-based access?

Privileges bundled in roles you grant and revoke.

GRANT shape?

GRANT SELECT ON orders TO analyst.

REVOKE?

Takes the privilege or role back the day someone leaves.

GRANT OPTION?

Lets a user pass privileges on. Rare.

Least privilege?

The app cannot ALTER TABLE. A reporter cannot DELETE.

Why split confidential columns?

If you cannot GRANT by column, make a secrets table.

Hash versus encrypt?

Hash is one-way for passwords. Encrypt is two-way for secrets you must read back.

Salt?

Per-row randomness so one rainbow table cannot crack every identical password.

Why not encrypt passwords?

You would decrypt to compare, which means reversible storage.

Why not hash tokens you must send later?

You cannot recover the token from a hash.

Plaintext allowed?

For public facts like a course title, not for secrets.

GRANT SELECT to everyone on hashes?

Still a gift to attackers.

Locked GRANT with plaintext passwords?

A gift to a backup thief.

Column comment worth writing?

Hashed, encrypted, or plain, and why.

Clerk versus admin?

Different roles. Never one shared admin login.

When do you review privileges?

Hire, leave, and when a table gains a sensitive column.

Is this a cloud tour?

No. GRANT, roles, labels, hashes, salts, encryption.

Reset password?

Write a new hash. Do not decrypt an old one.

Backup files?

Encrypt at rest so a stolen file is not a stolen diary.

Connections?

Encrypt in transit.

Where do keys live?

Not on the same stolen disk as the ciphertext.

Public students, sensitive grades, confidential ids?

A clearance ladder you must actually enforce.

Views that hide names?

A way to GRANT analysts less.

App account versus human admin?

Separate.

If a line in the security design is TBD?

Do not load real people yet.

Why is the film long?

Two doors, walked, with people in the schema.

What do you refuse?

TEXT passwords and a login named admin shared by all.

If an answer needed a second table, go draw it before you write more SQL.

Walk GRANT from a blank engine user who can only connect.

CREATE ROLE clerk, CREATE ROLE analyst, CREATE ROLE app, CREATE ROLE registrar.

GRANT SELECT INSERT UPDATE ON students TO clerk.

GRANT SELECT ON courses TO clerk.

GRANT SELECT ON enrollments TO analyst.

GRANT INSERT UPDATE ON enrollments TO app.

GRANT ALL ON ALL TABLES to registrar is tempting and usually too wide.

Registrar needs grades and ids; analyst does not need ids.

If ALL TABLES is how ids leak, list tables instead.

REVOKE INSERT ON students FROM clerk when clerks should not invent people.

A procedure reset_password that only updates password_hash is tighter than column guesswork.

GRANT EXECUTE on that procedure to helpdesk, not UPDATE on the whole users table.

Mandatory labels on rows, when you have them, mean a volunteer cannot UNION their way around a role.

Without row labels, two tables students_public and students_confidential are the poor person's MAC.

Do not put the confidential table in the same PUBLIC synonym.

Hashing parameters belong in a documented standard: algorithm, iterations, salt length.

Do not invent a fast homemade hash.

Encryption algorithms likewise: use what your platform already supports for columns or files, and keep keys in a vault the app reads at start.

Rotating keys means decrypting with the old and encrypting with the new, which is why reversible secrets are expensive.

Passwords never rotate by decryption; they rotate by user reset.

Audit who has GRANT OPTION once a quarter even in a fundamentals class project, because copies of class databases become real faster than you think.

A shared homework login is the admin-named-admin problem in costume.

Give each human a user, then a role.

Give the application a user, then a tighter role.

Never reuse those.

SELECT current privilege list after every GRANT until reading grants is a habit like reading WHERE.

Security that you cannot list is security you imagined.

List it.

Then hashing.

Then backups.

Then you are in the same ballpark as a twenty-minute security lecture instead of a three-minute slogan.

The slogan was two doors.

The lecture is walking through them with GRANT, roles, labels, hashes, salts, and encryption until the design has no TBD.

Close the TBD.
